sudo nano /etc/zabbix/zabbix_agentd.conf


UserParameter=db2.status[*],/path/to/db2_script.sh $1


chmod +x /path/to/db2_script.sh


sudo systemctl restart zabbix-agent




In the provided script, each metric corresponds to a particular aspect of the database's status or performance. Here's how each metric relates to the database status:

Database Size: Monitoring the overall size of the database provides insights into its growth and storage requirements. A sudden increase in database size could indicate unexpected data growth or inefficiencies in data management.
Tablespaces Usage: Tablespace usage reflects how much storage space each tablespace is currently consuming. Monitoring tablespace usage helps ensure that storage resources are effectively utilized and prevents potential issues such as tablespace overflows.
Buffer Pool Hit Ratio: The buffer pool hit ratio indicates the efficiency of data caching in the buffer pools. A high buffer pool hit ratio suggests that most database requests are satisfied from memory, leading to better performance. Conversely, a low buffer pool hit ratio may indicate memory pressure or inefficient caching.
Lock Waits: Lock waits occur when database transactions are waiting for exclusive access to a resource held by another transaction. Monitoring lock waits helps identify concurrency issues and optimize transaction management to prevent performance bottlenecks.
Number of Active Connections: The number of active connections represents the current workload on the database. Monitoring active connections helps ensure that the database can handle the expected workload and can be useful for capacity planning and resource allocation.
Query Execution Time: Monitoring query execution time helps identify slow-performing queries that may impact database performance. Analyzing query execution times can help optimize query performance and improve overall database responsiveness.
Log File Usage: Log file usage reflects the amount of space consumed by database transaction logs. Monitoring log file usage helps ensure that there is sufficient space for logging transactions and prevents log file overflows, which can lead to data loss or database corruption.
Index Fragmentation: Index fragmentation occurs when data in the database is not physically stored in contiguous blocks, leading to decreased query performance. Monitoring index fragmentation helps identify fragmented indexes that may require maintenance or rebuilding to optimize query performance.
Buffer Pool Usage: Buffer pool usage reflects the current utilization of buffer pools, which are used for caching data pages in memory. Monitoring buffer pool usage helps ensure efficient memory utilization and can reveal potential memory contention issues.



To create a Zabbix template for monitoring a DB2 database using the script provided, you'll need to define items, triggers, and possibly a discovery rule in the template. Here's a general guide on how to create a Zabbix template and add items for monitoring DB2:

Create a New Template:
Log in to the Zabbix web interface.
Navigate to Configuration > Templates.
Click on the "Create template" button.
Enter a name for your template (e.g., "DB2 Monitoring").
Optionally, add a description and specify other settings as needed.
Click "Save" to create the template.


Add Items:
In the template you just created, navigate to the "Items" tab.
Click on the "Create item" button.

Fill in the necessary fields:
Name: Enter a descriptive name for the item (e.g., "DB2 Database Size").
Type: Select "Zabbix agent" (since you're using the Zabbix agent to execute the script).
Key: Enter the key that corresponds to the metric you want to monitor (e.g., "db2_monitor.sh[database_size]").
Type of information: Choose the appropriate type based on the output of your script (e.g., Numeric (float)).
Other settings such as units, thresholds, and update intervals can be configured based on your requirements.
Click "Add" to create the item.

Repeat for Other Metrics:
Follow the same process to add items for each metric you want to monitor. Adjust the key and item name accordingly for each metric.

Define Triggers (Optional):
Navigate to the "Triggers" tab in your template.
Click on the "Create trigger" button.
Define triggers based on the items you've created. For example, you could create a trigger to alert when the database size exceeds a certain threshold.
Configure trigger expressions and severity levels as needed.
Click "Add" to create the trigger.

Save Changes:
Once you've added all the necessary items and triggers, click "Save" to save your template.

Link the Template to Hosts:
After creating the template, you need to link it to the hosts you want to monitor.
Navigate to the host configuration and link the template you just created to the appropriate hosts.

Import Script (Optional):
If you prefer to execute the script directly from Zabbix without using the Zabbix agent's UserParameter, you can import the script as a Zabbix script.
Navigate to Administration > Scripts and import your script. Then, you can use the script directly in item configurations without relying on UserParameter.
Once you've completed these steps, Zabbix will start monitoring your DB2 database based on the items and triggers defined in the template. You can then view the collected data and receive notifications for any issues detected by Zabbix.





